Thank you, sir. Right. Okay, maybe just a brief statement. Have you always been
a full-time writer? Yeah.
I went effectively out of... I should start at the beginning. I've never been
anything but a writer, actually.
I entered the University of Minnesota in 1939 when I was 15 years old, and began
work toward a degree for creative writing. I was a major in creative writing.
World War II came along before I was able to get my B.A. So I was out for three
years, four years, I forget which, something like that. Then I went back and
spent another two years, went into graduate school. At the time, it's about the
only time in my life when I ever considered doing anything but writing. I was
playing with the idea then of holding down a teaching job, going on and getting
my doctorate in English and teaching, and doing the writing on the side. After
World War II, we were all hypersensible. Everybody was very cool-headed. Let's
have this nonsense over with. Get down and get to work someplace. Luckily, I
came out of that and said, this is silly. I'd never intended to do anything but
writing. Instead of having the teaching pay for the writing, why not make the
writing pay for the writing? I simply dived out of graduate school into full
-time writing for the magazines. There were still quite a few magazines around.
There were still a fair number of pulp magazines, for example. Now, the slick
magazines paid a great deal more, but they were chancy.
The slick magazines, what they wanted from week to week would depend on what the
theme of that particular issue was. In other words, they might like you and they
might like what you write and so on and so forth, but if you'd written a story
about blowworms and they wanted one, you know, a fiction story that involved
blowworms, and they wanted one about cowboys on the western plains, then they
didn't want that particular story. And there would be no place else to send it.
The pulp magazines, on the other hand, if you wrote a science fiction story,
there were a number of science fiction magazines, or a number of detective, or a
number of western. So actually, I dived in and kept myself in float writing for
the magazines for about three or four years, and then I, somewhere about 1954, I
did my first science fiction novel. So I've been full-time as a writer since
1950. Now, I'd sold things before then. I'd sold a magazine piece, I think as
early as 1942, and I had something in my magazine, a short, short story in a
magazine section of a Minneapolis paper, and I'd been in the Toronto Star
Weekly, which was a magazine supplement that went along with the Toronto Star
Journal. Star Journal? Ah, can't remember the name of the newspaper. See, you
see, the thing is that I always intended to be a writer, and about for the first
30 years of my life, I was simply looking for the type of thing I wanted to
write. I cut my teeth on poetry. If I'd been born in the late 19th century, I
would have been at home because I would have done long narrative poems like
Idylls of the King, you know, Tennyson's, and Hiawatha, and things like this. As
it is, we're in a non-poetic age, and I finally ended up saying, well, to do
what I want to do, I'm going to have to use the medium of historical novels. And
then simply because magazines were putting bread and butter on the table and I
found out I liked science fiction best, I liked writing science fiction best, I
ended up doing essentially nothing but science fiction. And as I did this, I
came to realize the possibilities in that particular field for what I wanted to
do. And of course what I wanted to do has now taken shape long since 20 years
ago as the childe cycle of novels, which is, when it's done, will cover a
thousand years. There'll be three historical novels, starting with one about Sir
John Hawkwood, who was an Englishman in the 13th century who ended up as Captain
General of the military forces for Florence, Italy. And will end in the 23rd
century with Childe, C-H-I-L-D-E, the novel from which the whole series takes its
name. And the whole series, effectively, the stories don't chronologically
follow each other. They're connected thematically. And what they represent is
sort of a literary thematic argument, something that has never been done before,
actually. Which argues, it's a philosophical point, in fact, it argues that
we're undergoing evolution right now. It's not physical evolution or mental
evolution. It's a, there's no really good word for it. You would call it
spiritual evolution, but that isn't right either. It's an ethical evolution.
We're, of necessity, we're evolving what I call a responsible human being, and
we're sort of halfway there. From the time of the third, look at, from the
viewpoint of the 13th century, toward the 23rd, we're halfway to developing the
responsible human being. if you assume that, oh,
insanity is going to be brought under control unless civilization goes crash
within the next 50 or 100 years, if not a lot sooner, that is going to give you
a population of sane people. But even a population of sane people can have
individuals who, for their own purposes, are willing to destroy things. Now,
back in the days of of the flint axe and the stone club, if a particular caveman
decided to run wild and start bopping people over the head, he could probably
kill two or three others before everybody ganged up on him and stopped him. And
that's escalated up a lot of times where somebody who knows how can set up a
laboratory in the basement and blow up a large-sized city or part of a state.
And you extrapolate the curve of destructive possibility and you see that
within, well, probably less than the three to five hundred years I give us,
you're going to have a situation where any individual can destroy the whole race
unless some such sense of responsibility is developed. And what the historical
novels do and the contemporary novels do is what a good hard science fiction
story does, and that is they lay out the evidence of what we know and then
extrapolate forward from there saying, all right, if this and this and this is
so and we know it to be so, then doesn't this develop from it? You know, and if
I'm wrong in my hypothesis, point out where I'm wrong. And so the whole cycle
becomes essentially sort of one large science fiction story, even though it
covers historical, contemporary, and future novels. Okay, excellent. You've
answered about five or six of my questions there. I get it. I get it in the
habit of doing this. See, I'm a part-time lecturer and platform speaker and I
get off on this topic and I tend to run with it. Well, listen, I take it from
what you said and from what I understand from your work that essentially you're
an optimist about man's future. Oh, yes. Yes. And the evidence is there for
optimism. In fact, if you look at things historically, you'll find that
pessimism has always been the short-term view and optimism has been the long
-term view. What survives in the way of philosophy and literature and history
and so on and so forth shows a general overall improvement and development of
society. At any given moment you look around yourself and you say, my God, I
don't see how we can last out a year. You know, five years at the outside. But
they've been saying that since Egyptian days. you know, these old jokes about
the archaeologists looking at the writing inside the pyramid and saying, you
know, there is no hope. Well, the human race is simply going downhill. The
present generation doesn't know anything and the old generation has given up and
we've got problems that are too big for us to handle so what hope is there for
us? It has always looked that way from the static point in history. That
attitude is going to have to change, though, because beginning with the 1960s
particularly, but even before then, unconsciously, this change was coming about.
We're developing a generation and we have a generation right now that realizes
they stand on a moving sidewalk. You can see history. You can see the world
changing around you as you stand because of technological advances. In other
words, 100 to 150 years ago, if you were gifted with intelligence and ambition
and a certain amount of luck and possibilities, you could say, when I grow up,
I'm going to work hard and get rich and I'm going to have a White House on a
hill with a coach and six fine horses. And if you could point to the hill and,
my gosh, 40 years later, if you had done what you set out to do, you could be on
that hill with that house and those horses. Nowadays, you say, 40 years from
now, I'd like to have such and so. And if it's an equivalent of a house on a
hill and so on and so forth, by the time you get there, they may not have
houses, let alone White Houses and they won't be using horses or whatever our
present form of transportation is, and the hill may have been bulldozed flat for
that matter. In other words, living is becoming a situation in which intelligent
people will have to keep learning all their lives simply to keep up and keep
adjusting. Now, this implies unnecessary flexibility that was not in existence
before. History changed things, but it changed things so slowly that people
could pretend that in their own lifetime there was no change. Okay, very good.
To be a little more specific about your childe cycle, I think, if I recall, it
was in 1959 Astounding that the Dorsai series started. How much of your future
history had you conceived at that time? Which, what date was that? I think it
was in 1959 Astounding the Dorsai story that Genetic General was published. Oh,
yes, well actually the Astounding did it under its proper title which was Dorsai.
It was Ace Books at that time that changed it to that crazy title of Genetic
General which has since been buried. you know, we're back to calling it Dorsai
again. It came out in the magazine as a serial under the title Dorsai. Actually,
that was written in 1958
and the cycle as it's in a printout form if you want to describe it that way
wasn't in existence at that time. What had happened was that from the time when
I was very young I decided to as one of these kids that taught myself to read
when I was about four years old I did it by the well-known method of being read
to a lot and as a child and as a child you memorized the stories you read to and
I would pick up a book and pretend to read it and pretty soon I began to connect
what I was saying with what was on the paper and I was fascinated with stories.
I said, this is what I want to do and from then on I was looking for what
specifically I wanted to do with this and as I grew up and the ideas developed
it came that I wanted to do a large work that had a particular application to
literature and to my times. In other words I had the rough pattern of what I was
after but it hadn't coalesced it was misty around the edges. Back in 1948 after
World War II when I was in graduate school I was working on a historical novel
called The Pikeman which was about 15th century Italy as Hoffwood is 14th
century actually. And it's about a young member of one of the levies of Swiss
pikemen who comes down into Italy and sees the civilization down there and looks
at it through this clean pair of northern amoral mountain eyes essentially
because this is the explosive beginning of the Renaissance you see.
Now when I after I'd done Dorsai later on see when I started to make a living
writing short stories I didn't have time to sit down and write a novel. You have
to take six months at least out to do a decent job. And how you keep the wolf
from the door during those six months if you're living hand to mouth from short
story income is
the question. And so I simply didn't get around to writing a novel until I had
the money to do so. When I did I wrote it under a good deal of pressure in
pretty much of a hurry and I came up with Dorsai and this first novel and after
I'd done it the following summer I was at the Milford Science Fiction
Conference. Now this was a my invitation only conference for those of us who
were professional science fiction writers. It was held every June
up in the Catskills and I used to go in spite of the fact that the various
pollens up there at that time would trigger off my asthma and I wouldn't sleep
for a week.
I began to be afflicted by asthma during World War II and it would have been a
miserable time if it hadn't been such a magnificent time because it was our
chance to sit around and talk shop. The afternoons we would read each other's
manuscripts and criticize them in the evenings we'd sit around and debate some
particular writerly topic or something. But mostly it was simply knocking heads
with your fellow wizards that made it worthwhile. And while I was up there I hit
one night, one asthmatic night when I was exhausted and I thought well maybe
I'll sleep through and asthmatics tell them this. Of course you don't. I woke up
an hour later solid. Now people who don't know asthma don't realize that it
isn't a matter of getting breath in, it's a matter of getting breath out. You
swell up with air that you can't exhale. And your adrenaline level goes off the
top of the map. You're physically incapacitated and the mind just gallops. Now
we're way off in the woods effectively and there was nothing to be done until
dawn, at which time other people would be up and they could drive me to the
nearest doctor or clinic or what have you. And so I just, I had nothing to do
but sit there for five hours and wait for the sun to rise. And in that time I
worked out the pattern for this cycle completely. From soup to nuts with every
book in its place or rather every, I shouldn't say every book because the
numbers of books have doubled because of the size of what's being done. But it's
a case of the original books more or less being split down the middle. You see?
Because they're too big to publish as a chunk. The whole thing laid itself out.
And when dawn did rise, or the sun came up, I mean, I went and talked over with
one of our fellow visitors who was a man named Richard McKenna who wrote a novel
called The Sand Pebble, which, from which a movie was made that older people may
remember a little bit. The Sand Pebbles was not a science fiction movie. McKenna
had been in the Navy all his life, and it was about China, actually, at the time
of the Boxer. But it had been a very big, thick novel as the cycle was a very
large, massive thing. time. And so he had some reference. We sat there and
kicked it around. Essentially, what he did for me, he was like throwing a ball
against a wall. In the process of trying to explain it to him, I put my thoughts
into words. And curiously enough, what was worked out in that one night has
never really been changed. About ten years later, toward the end of the 60s, I
ran across a situation where I thought, well, I'll change it around. And I tried
it, and by golly, it wouldn't change. It was too interlocked with actual history
and patterns of development that I had had working from 20 years before I got
the definitive cycle plan itself. Okay, in other words, what you've done then is
to look back into history and extrapolate from what has happened to what is
happening now to what will happen in the future. That's right, yes. And saying
that as I see it, we are traveling this direction. And this is my evidence, and
see if you can find any evidence to disprove
what I project. This is, this attitude, this is what I took from science
fiction. This is what I found in science fiction that was so useful. And it was
the core of the magazine that John Campbell published in Astounding, which later
became Analog, the hard science fiction story that says this is a legitimate
hypothesis.
attack it if you can. Okay, I think a lot of people who don't know all of your
work would mostly associate you with the Dorsai novel, and I've read that some
people consider you to be a militarist because of that. I don't think that's
fair to you. Well, actually, it isn't really. The cycle is made with three
archetypes, three human archetypes, one of which is the warrior, one of which is
the philosopher, and one of which is the faith holder.
each book showcases one of these types. For example, Sir John Hawkwood is
obviously a warrior. The second historical novel deals with John Milton, not as
a poet, but as a propagandist essentially for the Promellian government during
the period when he was writing his tracks for the cause. So we have a faith
holder here, and the faith holder, he's ideal for my need as a faith holder
archetype because he shows the two faces of the faith holder. The faith holder
is actually genus face. You know the old Roman god at the entrance of the Roman
houses that looked both in and out had two faces. The two faces of the faith
holder is the fanatic and the true faith holder. The word saint doesn't quite
cover it. It's somebody who is utterly committed to the faith they believe in,
as opposed to the fanatic who essentially uses the faith for their own purpose.
Now, the historical novels show the warrior, the faith holder, and the
philosopher
in the person of people we can look up in history books. The 20th century will
show them that work in our century. The future ones show them in the projected
and problematical future. But the warrior is only one of three types, all of
which equally necessary. The philosopher and the faith holder. For example, the
book that's now in my publisher's hands, that's 1,400 manuscript pages long, and
will be coming out in about a year now, within the next year hopefully, will be
a great big book, is really
part of the closing scene of the whole doggone panorama that the cycle
represents. So its hero is all things, both warrior, faith holder, and
philosopher.
but it has, in this particular book, because there's two more to come after
this, these will be consecutive, these will be prequel, sequel, post-sequel,
final encyclopedia, then Chantry Guild, and then Child, will really be three
parts of one, there'll be a trilogy, effectively. The story will be continuous,
in other words, but this first one, the final encyclopedia, deals mainly with
the attitude of the faith holder. This is essentially what my multi-hero, who is
really a reincarnation, although reincarnation is not the proper word, it's the
second,
really the third life, I should say, of the man who was the hero of Dorsai,
Donal Graeme. Dorsai, he was Donal Graeme, effectively reanimated, went back in
time and animated the dead body because he can't change the past, to exist as
Paul Formain in Necromancer, and now he goes forward and becomes Tam, pardon me,
not Tam, but Hal Mayne in the last three books. And in the final encyclopedia,
Hal Mayne essentially becomes fully developed in his faith holder part. Now the
reason the emphasis on the military is there is for two reasons. One is this
caught the eye of the publishers, and they packaged the books as military
oriented books. And in fact, the ones that dealt with warrior types like Donal
Graeme, the first one door sign, where Donal Graeme is a warrior archetype, were
it was legitimate to it that way, but then they began publishing all the things
this way. See? That is part of it. The other part of it is that since all the
cycle must be sound, must be watertight, is that the military elements in there
are justified, are logicalized. You see? So it's not, I don't blame people for
being led astray in this particular fashion. But if they will look closely at
the cycle, they will see it isn't true. And about the only people I have any
quarrel with are those who, without reading things, simply make the assumption
that this is a militaristically oriented series of books. Okay, I just have
about two or three more. Can you handle that? Oh, sure. Okay, listen, um, okay,
uh, Donal Graeme, uh... I'll tell you what, uh, would you give, could you cut it
for just a second here? I'm going to have to get something. Yeah. My, my voice
tends to give out on me. Yeah, no trouble, no trouble. Great.
What was the, uh, where were we? Okay, I was just going to ask about, um, Donal
Green, uh, now he's got a vision or intuition. He's, uh, the future of man and
so forth. Why would you have that vision come from a dorsi, a warrior, say,
rather than an exotic? Well, he doesn't have a vision. Uh, what, what he has is,
uh, what he has is intuitive logic. And, uh, in other words, instead of, uh, it
bears the same relation to, uh, uh, ordinary logical process that, say,
calculus, please, uh, you know, has to arisbatech. Uh, this is merely a tool.
Now, I'm going to be substantiating this tool, uh, in the historical and
contemporary things. Uh, there's, uh, uh, this type of, of thinking is, uh, is
in its embryo form right now. You know, there is evidence of it just as, um, I
don't know, have, have you read, uh, Soldier Aspenut? Yes, I have. All right.
Well, you remember there's a artifact in there called the final encyclopedia.
And the final encyclopedia is, is not something, uh, is, is substantiated by
something, uh, called the theater of memory that was, uh, developed in the, uh,
early part of the Renaissance. About, well, early to mid part of the
Renaissance, actually. And again, the aim was, was to get all knowledge together
in a single handleable form, which is something that in the 20th century we're
approaching, uh, through computer science. See? All these things hook together.
They're, uh, the pattern of thought, the trick of thinking that is intuitive
logic, if I call intuitive logic, and that Donal uses in, uh,
uh, in Dorsai, and which will surface again, actually, in the later books. It,
it, it reappears, for example, in, uh, in the final encyclopedia and will, will
become one of the tools that give access to the creative universe, which is what
the whole cycle aims at all along. Because one of the arguments of the cycle,
cycle makes various arguments. As I said, it's, it's main one is that we are in
process of evolution, even though we don't know it right now. Uh, we're partway
toward the development of the responsible human being, particularly in Western
culture. Uh, but one of the other arguments is that we are, uh, let's see, what
were we, we were off on theater of memory, intuition, logic. Uh, we are
beginning to develop now the uses of our own mind and body that were more or
less dreamed of, uh, only at earlier times. Just as, for example, modern
technology was a dream of primitive man. Again, the flint worker. The flint
worker dreamed of being able to, uh, turn the rain off. Well, never found out
how to turn the rain off or turn the rain on, uh, until now. Now we can turn
rain on. We, we haven't yet hit the point where we can turn it off, but that's
right over the blank horizon. Uh, what they came up with instead was, were
shelters. Then they wanted a shelter that wasn't smoky. And by golly, somebody
invented the chimney. They wanted a house that would be warm in the winter and
they developed insulation and, uh, eventually furnaces. They dreamed of being
cool in the summer. And by golly, along came air conditioning and things like
this. The dreams of any people at any particular time in history become the
realities of future generation. Now, how far down the line, you don't know at
all, but essentially so far with the human race, just about anything that can be
dreamed of has been gained. Essentially. About the only thing, there's, uh,
there's a tendency to respond to when I say this sort of thing with platform
people. Well, during the question and answer period, they'll hold up their,
their hands and say, but, uh, how about the dream of universal peace? And I say,
well, now you're not dealing, you can deal with universe, you can cheat
universal peace very well with yourself. See? When you're trying to achieve it
with somebody else, now that's another kettle of fish entirely. See? You have
counter purposes going back and forth. But things that can be done, man against
his own universe, man against his own environment, uh, is a battle that so far
we tend to win. And we're also beginning to win, uh, again in this last thousand
years, and this is one of the things we're partway toward developing now, the
battle of man against himself. In other words, we're beginning to say to
ourselves, I don't want to be fat. You know? I don't want to be unhappy. I don't
want to be, uh, depressed. And we're beginning to fumble out ways of doing
something about fat and, uh, depression and so on and so forth. Just as we're
beginning to fumble toward an answer to, uh, the question of, of universal
hunger. You know? The fact that some people are always going to lack this or
lack that.
Okay, that's good. Um, okay, I can, I just have about two more. Now, um, I know,
I know you work very hard at this, but as long as you've written now, how hard
is it for you to write? Do you have to put a lot of work into it? Oh, the
writing, any kind, any, any art requires an infinite amount of work. And what
was it said that, uh, uh, the definition of art was, was the taking of infinite
pains or words to that effect. Uh, but the point is, uh, the person doing it
enjoys it or he doesn't do it. Uh, I'm, I'm fascinated with the work I do. Uh,
I, you wonder, for example, how a concert pianist can practice five hours a day,
you know, week after week, month after month, year after year. You think, uh, if
you were not, if you're a non-piano player, or if you had piano playing lessons
pushed on you and didn't like them when you were young, you think that this must
be, uh, this must be a self-imposed agony. It isn't. It, it, it's a sheer
pleasure for him to, to get things just right. And this, of course, is the
battle cry of the artist, to get things just right. Uh, I, I write and rewrite
and rewrite and rewrite again. This last book, uh, sections of it, uh, were
written once and barely touched again. Other sections were written in numberable
times. I really couldn't tell you how many, 10 or more, 10, 15 times to get it
just right. Uh, I can't reread anything I've written without picking up a pencil
and starting to, to correct and improve it. It's instinctive. Most writers have
this kind of reaction to a certain extent, although some rewrite more, some
rewrite less. There is a type of writer that, uh, that doesn't rewrite, but
instead sits and does nothing for a long time and then sits down and does it
just the way he or she wants it. And that possibly is the hardest work of all
because it's all being done in the end. I do it on paper. Of course, uh, the
fact that I use, uh, I use a computer to write with nowadays makes it that much
easier, makes it that much faster.
Okay, uh, finally, I want to make sure I have this straight now because I've
read some differing, some differing statements from critics on your childe cycle.
Okay, when it's finished, there will be 12 novels. Is that right? Uh, let's see
now. Yes, the, um, original plan was for six novels. Um,
uh, let me see. No, for nine novels. Pardon me. Um, three historical, three late
in the 20th century, and three late in the future. Uh, because I started on the
future length first, it was there I first discovered that these, that each book
was, was going to be too big to get into one, uh, one set of covers. Also, to
begin with, with Dorsai and, uh, Soldier Astronaut and Necromancer and things
like that, I was up against the fact that publishers, uh, refused to print
category fiction in lengths of much more than 100,000 words at that time.
Remember this the first big book to come out actually was Frank Herbert's Dune which
antedates Dorsai which happened earlier about I think four or six years something
like that and Dune was printed only because one editor in particular practically well
lay his job on the line and practically offered to shoot their, shoot up the publishing house unless they
went after it. And they chewed their fingernails, you know, because there's,
there's a great deal of, of money involved in printing a very large book. Uh,
this is still the case, even with paperbacks, even in paperback, it's very
expensive to do a big, thick book. So these things had to be cut, uh, pardon me,
I mean, they had to be divided into smaller chunks. And the result was I ended
up with three historical, three contemporary, and, uh, six forward. Now, of that
six forward, uh, final encyclopedia, uh, at 1400 pages is so big that childe,
which should have been, see that final encyclopedia is the penultimate novel.
The last one, the ultimate one is childe. And obviously if final encyclopedia is
1400, childe would have run close to 2000 manuscript pages, which is far too big.
So I've had to split that again. So effectively what we have now is, uh, not 12,
but 13 novels. Now, I would like to say that this won't happen anymore, that
the, uh, three, once I get through childe, the three historical and the three
contemporary will, will stay within single volume sizes. I think there's a
pretty good chance, except in the case of Hawkwood. Now, and the problem with
that is, is that Sir John Hawkwood, the real, the actual man, uh, lived a very
long time by medieval standards. It's an astonishingly long time when you just,
uh, stopped to think that most of his adult life was spent, uh, in hand-to-hand
combat wearing armor. Uh, he, he actually lived into his seventies and he
covered in that time what by modern standards would have been three or four
lifetimes. He starts out in Sible Heddingham, England, which is out in the
boondocks of Essex in his time, literally when Essex was mainly forest and, uh,
ends up in Florence, Italy, which at that time was the center of Western
civilization. So effectively he traveled in subjective time about 150 to 180
years in terms of, of moving forward with the pattern of civilization. Excuse
me, time out.
Yeah, I'm back with you. Sure.
Okay. What else have you got for me? Well, okay. I guess I do have one more.
That was about it. But let me ask you one more. Uh, this is something we like to
ask most authors who've been written, who've written as long as you have. Um, as
you look around the field now, is it essentially different than it was when you
started writing? Oh, yes. You know, it's, it's a great deal different. Uh, but
the difference is, uh, one of natural, natural evolution and development. Uh, in
other words, it's, it's not that, you see, there was no point at which science
fiction stood still. The, if you look at the magazines of the late 1920s, which
is when Hugo Gernsback was, uh, essentially starting the field in its modern
sense, you can trace science fiction, if you, if you like, back to the Athenian
Greeks, uh, in, in the sense of stories about other worlds and other places. Uh,
Atlantis, the concept of Atlantis goes back that far, for example. Uh, Cyrano de
Bergerac, and I'm talking about the actual man, not the, uh, character in the
play, uh, wrote a, uh, several stories. One of them is called Voyages to the Sun
and the Moon.
Uh, there, there was a, in other words, it, it, it, it, it's a story type that
runs, runs down through history, although it's rare. It, it became a school,
essentially, a category in, in publisher's terms in the 1920s when magazines
began to devote themselves. This was the heyday of the magazines, and there were
racing magazines and Western magazines, and there were science fiction
magazines, magazines of fantastic science. That's right. And, um, it, what was
printed in the, uh, late 1920s and the early 1930s, uh, went through a period of
development when John Gamble took over Astounding, and it, and the concept of
the hard science fiction story, and also something else, the idea story, which
is essentially a thematic science fiction story, uh, began with, with John in
the 30s. And that period has developed and gone on. They, they were originally
hardware stories, originally science fiction. That's, as, uh, it's gone from
hard science to essentially soft science. In other words, uh, the, the subject,
the scientific element has, has gone from physics and chemistry to, uh, or
rather went from physics and chemistry into, uh, psychology and sociology and
things like this. And, uh, with the emergence in the 60s of the excellent crop
of women writers who have almost dominated the field since then, uh, we've,
we've had the introduction of character into our stories. They have become more,
uh, much more stories of human interest. See? As, uh, has been pointed out
instead of, we've been exploring the inner universe as much as we've been
exploring the outer universe, perhaps more. Now, this is a great development,
actually. Any literary field that doesn't develop dies. You can see, uh, if you
look at the mystery field, which as a category goes back farther than science
fiction, as a recognized category goes back farther than science fiction, right
into the 19th century. You can see the development there the same way. From the
deductive mystery, Sherlock Holmes type on up to the present day, uh, spy story
like, uh, uh, the Lee Carey stories, you know, uh, the last one of which was
Smiley's Eh, can't remember. But anyway, uh, the type of, uh, there's the action
mystery and there's the spy mystery and so on and so forth. Uh, these periods of
development, I mean, pardon me, not these periods of development, but this
constant, uh, rush of development goes on all the time. And of course, it's had
its effect on science fiction. We have, we have writers nowadays who, uh, who
are much more interested in the effect of, uh, future happenings upon people
than upon future happenings itself. Uh, this, this makes for very interesting,
very interesting fiction. And it's a curious field in that the older writers,
uh, learn from the younger writers. In other words, we shift to, we were writing
earlier and writing the earlier type of science science fiction, uh, learn and
develop along with the field itself. So that the useful elements that come in
later on are picked up and shown in their own work as well. Uh, the, uh, the,
uh, the one thing that doesn't change is the emphasis on, uh, exploration.
Science fiction is one field that has a readership that will allow you to take,
that will allow the author to take a look at anything, to explore any topic. And
because of this, it is, it's very wholesome and very honest. This is one reason,
for example, what the, uh, the whole women, uh, uh, the whole point of the
women's, the whole element of the women's movement, uh, came up in literature.
It was the sort of thing that science fiction could not ignore. If you see
something happening, a change happening in your own lifetime, and you're writing
about the future, you have to assume that there will be future effect from this
happening. Excuse me, time out again.
I'm afraid my voice is going out for good here. Yeah, well, we're, you know,
that's fine, uh, Mr. Dickson. We've, we've really got enough material. Yeah. Um.
I, um, I will have more to say. I hope I am not this croaky when I get down to
the University of Kansas. Yeah, we're, we're almost approaching an hour, so you
put a, you put a lot of talking in. Um, well, listen, then, uh, we sure
appreciate the time. What we'll do is, uh, it probably is going to be, um, fall
sometime before these are edited and sent to you. Right. But I will meet you in,
uh, in Kansas this summer. I'm looking forward to that. Okay. And, uh, listen,
we very much appreciate your time. We know how busy you are. Oh, that's, it's,
life, life picks you up by the strut of the neck and carries you along. I ask
you, you know, you will find yourself in, in doing the same thing, you know, in
a while. Uh, not only, you not only get busier as you go along, but the world
itself gets busier around you. God knows what's going to happen in the long run.
Well, that's the way it seems. I wonder if it's really that way, though. Oh,
yeah. It is. It is. Uh, we have a, uh, there's a number of factors that have
their effect here. One is simply that the world's population is increasing. And
if you look closely at it, you'll see that this increases competition. There are
much more, whatever, whatever your level of competence is, there's, there's more
people at that level in a position to compete with you. Also, uh, we have tools
that have proliferated. Tools, everything from the, uh, dog on a hammer to the
dog on a computer itself. And, uh, we're in a situation, since we live in the
competitive society, in which, uh, the more tools you can handle, uh, the better
position you are in that competition. It makes life easier, more pleasant, and
far more interesting to be able to, to be able to use these tools. And the tools
can be a knowledge of foreign languages, or it can be, as I say, a knowledge of,
of, uh, uh, how to program a computer, see. Or a knowledge of space mechanics,
for that matter. These things become fascinating, particularly the people who
are interested in, in life in general. Yeah, I, um, I'm a medievalist myself.
I've got to get busy here and teach Chaucer in about half an hour. I'm an
English teacher here at the college. Chaucer, uh, Chaucer was one of my
favorites. In fact, Chaucer's contemporary with Hawkwood. Oh, yeah, I'm sure.
They, uh, since, since Chaucer was used, as you probably know, on a number of
confidential, uh, diplomatic, uh, sent on confidential diplomatic journeys, uh,
by the king a great deal, uh, the chances that he and Hogwood met are pretty
doggone good. Yeah, okay, I'll be looking forward to those, uh, those future
novels. Listen, Mr. Dickson, we sure appreciate the time, and, uh, I'll be seeing
you in a few weeks in Kansas, and meet you in person. All right, good. Thank you
very much, then. Great. Okay, goodbye.